Good day I'm Norman Wildberger and today we start
a exciting new chapter in this course on the
foundations of mathematics where we start to delve
into the problems that currently exist in modern
pure mathematics there are very serious logical
difficulties that are generally unacknowledged by
the profession but which seriously undermine both
the education of young people and the research
endeavors of us peer mathematicians so this second
part of the course follows from the first part in
the first part we've had a pretty good look at
the three core subjects in mathematics which are
arithmetic geometry and algebra and I've rather
slowly and methodically prepared a pretty decent
foundation for those three subjects we're now
heading towards analysis calculus if you like
and set theory and then some higher subjects
as well but unfortunately now we're bumping
into the mathematics which is already there which
is in my opinion deeply flawed so I have to clear
some space and I have to try to reorganize your
understanding of modern mathematics that's what
I'm going to be trying to do in the second part
so I'm thinking of it as actually being like a
trial this is mathematics on trial and I'm going
to try to demonstrate why it is that modern pure
mathematics doesn't really work logically it of
course works on a lot of other levels it works
as a sociological enterprise there's thousands
of practitioners thousands of papers every year
conferences seminars students graduating and so
on so at that level it works but at the level of a
logical discipline it doesn't work and that's what
I'm going to have to try to convince you of so I
see myself as something of a public prosecutor
on behalf of the people by which we can generally
mean students present and future and my job is to
clearly lay out what the difficulties are and to
challenge the professorial to meet and acknowledge
those difficulties so we'll see how we go I'm
going to be concentrating on five key problems
and in the course of these lectures and we're
going to be going on for quite some time I'm going
to try to convince you that modern mathematics is
characterized by first of all inconsistent rigor
the level of rigor is not what it should be and
the rigor that we do see is inconsistent which
allows all kinds of strange arguments and weak
arguments to flourish problematic definitions so
many definitions of modern pure mathematics when
you look carefully at them start to disintegrate
I'm going to demonstrate that claim I'm going
to talk about the reliance on axioms which
characterizes 20th century mathematics which
is a deeply unfortunate development contrary to
the historical trend up to that time and is in my
opinion a reversal of direction actually ended
up making us go in the wrong direction rather
than the right direction so we have a very careful
look at that you're important modern mathematics
because it's essentially off the rails logically
it turns out to be computationally much weaker
than it ought to be there are many situations
where we have these overblown theories in which
when you actually try to compute important things
you find yourself stymied so the theories are big
on talk and big on abstract abstractions but when
it comes to computing stuff and then we see that
things are not as rosy as they ought to be and
finally the lack of proper rich source of examples
in many modern mathematical theories this is a
key litmus test to whether you're understanding
mathematics correctly if you're understanding
mathematics correctly there are a lot of rich
examples that you can lay out very clearly and
people can have a look at that's like scientific
evidence and when you have theories with a
lot of theorems but very few or inaccessible
examples it's a sign that there is something
wrong and in modern mathematics unfortunately
there is a very lot that is wrong and I'm going
to try to demonstrate these things so I need to
make some important clarification with my charges
my charges do not apply across the board and they
do not apply uniformly there are some branches
of mathematics which are a lot more guilty of
obscure logic than others so let's have a look at
what I consider to be the problematic areas and
the non problematic areas the problematic areas
first of all include prominently calculus and
analysis set theory and logic modern geometry and
topology probability theory measure theory and to
a certain extent algebraic geometry so I'm going
to try to convince you or show you examples of
how these subjects are all fraught with logical
problems very serious logical problems that are
not easily fixed so these subjects are going
to really have to be completely rethought it's
a very big challenge very serious challenge
and of course will be resisted strongly by
the practitioners who will do their utmost to try
to prevent me from making this case successfully
there are also however non problematic areas and
generally speaking the more finite an area the
more concrete an area the more down-to-earth an
area it is the less problematic it's likely to
be the star performer in modern mathematics as
far as logical clarity goes is almost surely the
subject combinatorics which not surprisingly
has really been a star performer in the last
50 years in pure mathematics it my opinion it's
been really the dominant subject in terms of its
explosive development and that's not a surprise
because I think people are subconsciously at
least aware that combinatorics really makes
sense well a lot of these other subjects it's
a lot more dubious aspects of number theory
are quite solid but there are also aspects of
number theory which are questionable so I put
a little question mark saying that not all is
right in this subject but a lot of it is a lot of
algebra is fine but there are some aspects of it
which need rethinking most of linear algebra
or at least a good part of linear algebra is
fine but there are also some significant parts of
that that have to be rethought there's aspects of
algebraic geometry which are also fine so
it actually gets to be in both categories
and there's other subjects for example finite
geometry might be put over here although you
might also say it's part of combinatorics so I'm
not making blanket across-the-board accusations
here but the accusations do extend over rather a
large part of the subject so many people will be
affected and many undergraduate courses are are
affected by these claims and another important
clarification that I need to make is that most
of what I say applies to pure mathematics and
not to Applied Mathematics applied mathematics
is a very broad discipline which for me at least
includes statistics computational mathematics
engineering mathematics fluid mechanics aspects
of mathematical physics aspects of computer
science and other things as well applied
mathematics has had a great run in the 20th
century and probably it's fair to say that
applied mathematics has dominated a lot of the
developments of 20th century mathematics and in
my opinion it's mostly all good so what I'm saying
does not apply to applied mathematics which is
concerned with concrete objective goals and not
so much with theoretical abstract understanding
however there are some places where some of these
applied subjects overlap with pure mathematics and
when they do there is probably some difficulty in
those subjects as well one of the very important
challenges for pure mathematics is to try to
figure out mathematics in a way that's useful and
powerful for applied mathematicians and I claim
that once we start getting our act together and
figuring out how mathematics goes properly then
a lot of these disciplines will be strengthened
immediately because it's much easier to work
with a proper mathematics than it is with an
improper mathematics proper mathematics is almost
always more powerful and insightful the first key
problem that was on my list was inconsistent
rigor and that might be a surprise to a lot of
students of mathematics who have been trained to
think that we are now at a high point as far as
rigor goes in the history of mathematics there
is this story that accompanies the teaching of
mathematics which suggests strongly that rigor
has been more or less going up in the last few
hundred years so here is a little diagram with
time on this axis and rigor in this direction
and say here is a time of Euclid and here is now
and the general perception is something like this
that generally the level of rigor in mathematics
at Euclid's time as years went by went up and down
a little bit but in the last few hundred years
it's been steadily increasing increasing and
now we are pretty well at a high point and rigor
is becoming more and more solid and an Universal
this is a very unfortunate perception because
it's almost the opposite of what is really the
case a much more accurate picture is this one
here the same axis time and rigor but in this
more accurate picture it's revealed that rigor
has actually been with some wobbles decreasing
pretty steadily since the time of Euclid rigor
has not been increasing especially in the last
few hundred years there's this common idea
amongst analysts and it's often propounded in
books that these days the modern analyst is much
more rigorous than say oiler was people look back
on oiler and sort of in a superior way that Euler
you know he had some serious problems with with
rigor well I'm going to show you that Euler was in
fact much more rigorous in a reasonable sense of
that term then most modern analysts you're going
to start going to make that case and you might
be surprised okay so please have a think about
this okay I have to make this case and I will
make this case but it's probably good that you
see these graphs so you have a sense that there
are alternate perceptions alternate possibilities
to thinking about things other than the one that
we have sort of been indoctrinated to believe
in so in this course we've already established
definitions for many simple mathematical objects
including natural numbers first of all that was
our fact our starting point and then integers we
defined fractions rational numbers points lines
area triangle parallelogram quadrants spread
circle vector poly number tangents algebraic
curves and probably some other things too these
are concepts which can be defined clearly and
precisely and I've hopefully shown you how to
do that what is one way of introducing those
concepts clearly and precisely however there are
a lot of modern pure maths definitions which are
highly problematic for which this statement
is not at all so clear for example well the
definition of a function we've talked about
that definition and the problems associated
with it in math foundations 42 if you haven't
watched that video have a look at it I claim
that the modern definition of a function doesn't
work and we're going to be looking at a lot of
other modern definitions which currently don't
work when you look at them carefully the logic
breaks down including the concepts of sequence
real number limit continuity derivative integral
or whether it's Riemann integral or lebesgue
integral eigenvalue infinite set infinite group
actually infinite anything pretty well manifold
topological space variety category metric space
topological vector space and many others I claim
that each one of these definitions currently is
problematic and unfortunately not so easily fixed
you cannot just tweak the definition a little bit
and bring it into focus these definitions are
all seriously and fundamentally flawed and it's
part of my job in the months ahead to go through
examples and to show you exactly what is wrong
with these definitions so some of these concepts
can be rescued but most of them require a serious
restructuring of the underlying theories now
there will be many of you especially those pure
mathematicians who are watching who are seriously
going to challenge that statement of course and
you may feel that you know exactly what one or
many of these concepts are and you may actually
prove me wrong in a very simple way so I'm happy
to invite people to give me feedback and to
contribute comments and suggestions to this course
and a way to do that is just to make comments on
the videos themselves so for example if you know
how to define what a function is for example then
you can prove me wrong once and for all just
by laying out very clearly for us what exactly
a function is but you must be aware that I have
pretty stringent demands on definition if you're
going to use a definition with four or five key
mathematical words involved in it you had better
make sure that those four or five mathematical
words have some prior definition somewhere that
there's some link essentially from those words
to some other place where I can find out what you
mean by those words so for example with the idea
of a function if you tell us that well a function
is a rule that takes an L object-- of one kind and
outputs an object of another kind obviously I'm
going to ask you well what do you mean by the word
rule yes you can define function in terms of rule
but you probably also could define rule in terms
of function and we want to make sure that we don't
have that kind of circularity in our definitions
so if you're going to define function in terms of
rule please make sure that somewhere you have a
good definition of what our rule is okay and that
goes for any possible definition that you're
going to make we have high standards in this
course and appeals to Authority are not going to
carry very much weight for us okay it's scientific
evidence scientific clear thinking which is going
to carry the day or not so does any of this matter
who cares if modern mathematics has lots of
definitions that don't really work or if people
are fast and loose with rigor does it really make
a difference well I think it does it makes a lot
of difference and it has a lot of consequences
and the first and foremost consequence is the
difficulties with mathematics education that are
a direct consequence of these logical weaknesses
we all know that mathematics education in the
modern world has some serious problems and there's
a range of possible reasons and people debate
and discuss what the problems are how to fix them
in my opinion a very serious contributor to this
problem is the fact that pure mathematicians have
not figured out their subject in the right way
this is a key aspect of the problem if us pure
mathematicians understood our subject properly
with an absolutely clear logical structure then it
would have enormous repercussions for mathematics
education in particular teacher training is made
a lot easier with logical clear mathematics
developing curriculum is dramatically simplified
if you have a strong understanding of the logical
flow of the subject student motivation is easier
to capture if the mathematics makes sense these
niggling problems of logical inconsistencies
are not invisible to younger students they may
not be able to put their finger on it but they
can smell that things don't work they can sense
that they are not being given a logically tight
subject and I think a lot of them are turned
off of mathematics because of the prescriptive
nature memorize this and memorize that and don't
argue with us do mathematics in the right way
and it becomes simpler if you want an example of
that learn about rational trigonometry rational
trigonometry is a new and much simpler way of
doing trigonometry leads to a much simpler way
of doing geometry and it's because you approach
the subject in the right way so then it becomes
a lot simpler and when people do eventually move
to rational trigonometry training in schools the
result will inevitably be much happier students
and teachers that's just one example but it's a
very good example another consequence of the
logical weakness of modern mathematics is the
convoluted and overly complicated research that's
going on our journals are full of convoluted and
overly complicated stuff and it's unfortunate
and to a certain extent it means a waste of the
energies and the efforts of a whole generation of
researchers okay so there's a lot to be gained by
putting mathematics back on the right track and
finally another important consequence is that we
end up having inappropriate and ineffective
tools to give to the applied mathematicians
the physicists the computer scientists the
statisticians and others they want pure
mathematical theories that will fit the problems
that they're trying to investigate and our best
chance of giving them the right tools is to
understand mathematics in the right way and
that absolutely requires a logical understanding
of the subject it's got to make logical sense
and if it doesn't you can be sure that it's not
the right way of thinking about mathematics so
in this second part of the course my aims are
to first of all provide a careful honest and
clear overview of the problems with modern pure
mathematics and I want to look in detail at the
critical issues so we'll have a very very good and
thorough look at a lot of the problematic issues
so it's not going to be entirely negative because
we are going to be learning a lot of things while
we're doing this okay so it's still going to be
very much a learning experience I hope that you
learn something with each video for example we're
going to have a very in-depth discussion of real
numbers and all the different possible approaches
to real numbers and I'm going to explain to you
why none of those approaches work okay so you're
going to learn something from that we're talking
about infinite sets limits integrals many things
in some detail so even if you not too familiar
with some of these ideas you will become familiar
with them at the same time as recognizing where
the logical problems are and ultimately I want to
do something positive what I want to do is I want
to lay the groundwork for a new and improved and
simplified approach to well at least certainly
calculus and analysis so I'm going to be aiming
towards this algebraic calculus which I've already
told you a little bit about but we are going to
be aiming towards establishing that on a very
proper footing and finally I want to reorient a
new generation of mathematics students I'm very
conscious of all those students of mathematics
out there who are currently being offered what
is in my view an inadequate theory and I want to
fix that situation I want to give them something
which is better than what's currently on offer now
the students can be young or old or in-between the
important thing is to have a flexible approach
to have an open mind and that's going to be
very important in this part of the course
so I ask you as members of the jury not to
decide too soon listen to the evidence weigh it
carefully and try to make up your own mind it's
a interesting challenge to be confronted with
ideas which are contrary to the way we've been
trained to think it can be disorienting and our
initial reaction of course is to try to reject
that kind of thinking but if we are wrong and
we can admit to it and change our orientation
it can be a very positive thing for us so I hope
that in the fullness of time you will appreciate
this new way of approaching mathematics that I'm
going to lay out for you all right so the trial
begins with our next video we are going to look
at rigor in modern mathematics and why it's at
such an unhappy state I hope you'll join me for
that I've known Wildberger thanks for listening